Document process for closing trial accounts (#374)
alphagov/paas-team-manual: source/accounts/closing_trial_accounts.html.md

# Process for closing GOV.UK PaaS trial accounts

> This process describes how we close old trial accounts to retain historical billing data and prevent running up infrastructure bills.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This process describes how we close old trial accounts to retain historical billing data and prevent infrastructure bills running up.
```

> This process describes how we close old trial accounts to retain historical billing data and prevent their use ongoing and the ability to run up infrastructure bills.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This process describes how we close old trial accounts to retain historical billing data and prevent running up infrastructure bills.
```

A closed account:

>   - is unusable by the tenant (no `cf push`, `cf start`. `cf stop`, `cf scale`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - is unusable by the tenant (no `cf push`, `cf start`, `cf stop` or `cf scale`)
```

  - has no services or data 
  - has no applications 
  - is flagged as suspended
  - has no users associated with the Cloud Foundry org
  - incurs no costs to us
  - exists as an empty shell in Cloud Foundry

> ![A state diagram showing the possible routes for tenants adopting the paas](/diagrams/process-for-closing-old-trial-accounts.svg)

Reviewer: Broken link

| Sequence | Title | Description | Max time |
|:---|:---|:---|:---|

> |1|New tenant|A new tenant that does not have a paas account yet|Indefinitely|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|1|New tenant|A new tenant that does not have a PaaS account yet|Indefinitely|
```

|2|Trial|A tenant with a 90 day trial account with the ability to deploy apps and provision small backing services|90 days|
|3|Billable|A full tenant with a billing arrangement that is being recharged for the resource consumed|Indefinitely|

> |4|Suspended|The org is suspended and the tenant will not be able to perform any operations on apps or services.<br /><br />Users will be able to use the apps. Tenants will be able to log in to CloudFoundry.|30 days|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|4|Suspended|The org is suspended and the tenant will not be able to perform any operations on apps or services.<br /><br />Users will be able to use the apps. Tenants will be able to log in to Cloud Foundry.|30 days|
```

> |5|Halted|The apps are halted/stopped and users will receive 404 error messages from the platform.<br /><br />The data is preserved and the account will still run up bills for the databases|30 days|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|5|Halted|The apps are halted/stopped and users will receive '404' error messages from the platform.<br /><br />The data is preserved and the account will still run up bills for the databases|30 days|
```

> |5|Halted|The apps are halted/stopped and users will receive 404 error messages from the platform.<br /><br />The data is preserved and the account will still run up bills for the databases|30 days|

Reviewer: Is there a difference in functionality between 'halted' and 'stopped'?

Author: maybe @AP-Hunt or @pauldougan knows?

Reviewer 3: The account state is halted, and the apps are stopped. We don't use the word halted with apps.

Author: update the sentence to "The apps are stopped and users will receive..." then ?

Author: sentence updated

> |6|Removed|The application instances and services are deleted by an operator.<br /><br />Users will see no difference compared to a halted/stopped app, but the tenant will have to re-push the app and re-create any backing services to restore their apps.<br /><br />At this point the account cannot incur any billable events and the bill goes to zero.<br /><br />All apps and services and data unavailable.|Indefinitely|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|6|Removed|The application instances and services are deleted by an operator.<br /><br />Users will see no difference compared to a halted/stopped app, but the tenant will have to re-push the app and re-create any backing services to restore their apps.<br /><br />At this point the account cannot incur any billable events and the bill goes to zero.<br /><br />All app, services and data are unavailable.|Indefinitely|
```

> |6|Removed|The application instances and services are deleted by an operator.<br /><br />Users will see no difference compared to a halted/stopped app, but the tenant will have to re-push the app and re-create any backing services to restore their apps.<br /><br />Export final bill and any necessary data.<br /><br />At this point the account cannot incur any billable events and the bill goes to zero.<br /><br />All apps and services and data unavailable.|Indefinitely|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|6|Removed|The application instances and services are deleted by an operator.<br /><br />Users will see no difference compared to a halted/stopped app, but the tenant will have to re-push the app and re-create any backing services to restore their apps.<br /><br />At this point the account cannot incur any billable events and the bill goes to zero.<br /><br />All apps and services and data unavailable.|Indefinitely|
```

![BAU trial account expiry process](/diagrams/BAU-trial-account-expiry-process-map.svg)

## Accounts closure process

1. Review trial organisations<br />

>   - [in London region](https://admin.london.cloud.service.gov.uk/reports/organisations)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - [in the London region](https://admin.london.cloud.service.gov.uk/reports/organisations)
```

>   - [in Ireland region](https://admin.cloud.service.gov.uk/reports/organisations)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - [in the Ireland region](https://admin.cloud.service.gov.uk/reports/organisations)
```

>   - Look for accounts that are 2.5 months in to their 3 month trial period, and still on the trial quota

Reviewer: This shouldn't be a bullet point

Author: tech docs markdown parse can't handle breaks in lists unfortunately

> 1. Update [backlog list of potential accounts](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1bZP7W-5nJxDicJ2lc_eT873zXXjXnHh-qGYJobHUIv8/edit#gid=527069954) for closure (in PaaS adoption tracker)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Update the [backlog list of potential accounts](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1bZP7W-5nJxDicJ2lc_eT873zXXjXnHh-qGYJobHUIv8/edit#gid=527069954) for closure (in PaaS adoption tracker)
```

> 1. Update [backlog list of potential accounts](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1bZP7W-5nJxDicJ2lc_eT873zXXjXnHh-qGYJobHUIv8/edit#gid=527069954) for closure (in PaaS adoption tracker)

Reviewer: Points in numbered lists should have full stops, according to the style guide

> 1. Keep track of [potential accounts for closure](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1bZP7W-5nJxDicJ2lc_eT873zXXjXnHh-qGYJobHUIv8/edit#gid=949444725) in tracker while contacting org managers 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Keep track of [potential accounts for closure](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1bZP7W-5nJxDicJ2lc_eT873zXXjXnHh-qGYJobHUIv8/edit#gid=949444725) in the tracker while contacting org managers 
```

> 1. Keep track of [closed accounts and cost savings](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1bZP7W-5nJxDicJ2lc_eT873zXXjXnHh-qGYJobHUIv8/edit#gid=159027804) by adding each trial account to the tracker

Reviewer 2: Thanks, all of these link to the correct spreadsheet

1. If tenant confirms they intend to keep using their account, they need to [switch to billable](https://team-manual.cloud.service.gov.uk/accounts/account_lifecycle/#upgrading-trial-orgs-to-paid-orgs) - support engineer and DM to help (track via zendesk)
If tenant says they don’t want the account, go to state 6 (Removed)
1. If no response from tenant after 2 weeks grace period the support engineer suspends the account - State 4 (Suspended)
1. Notify the tenant that their trial account has been suspended and they have 30 days to tell us they need the account. Make it clear that after this timeframe, we will stop their apps running, but keep their data State 5 (Halted)
1. If tenant responds, they need to [switch to billable](https://team-manual.cloud.service.gov.uk/accounts/account_lifecycle/#upgrading-trial-orgs-to-paid-orgs) - support engineer and DM to help (track via Zendesk)
If tenant says they don’t want the account, go to state 6 (Removed) 

> 1. If no response from tenant, after the 1 month grace period the support engineer stops apps running state 5 (Halted)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. If no response from tenant, after the 30 day grace period the support engineer stops apps running state 5 (Halted)
```

1. Notify the tenant via Zendesk that we have stopped their apps services

> 1. Pull billing data associated with the trial account and save?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Pull billing data associated with the trial account and save in [PaaS team folder] (https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1aq0gSOrDS1EGsq0aEx4dIOYEmy9j5dJL)
```

1. Notify tenant via Zendesk that in 30 days we will delete any data and all of their apps

> 1. If no response from tenant, after the 1 month grace period the support engineer deletes all apps and services, and removes users from the org state 6 (removed)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. If no response from tenant, after the 30 day grace period the support engineer deletes all apps and services, and removes users - org state 6 (removed)
```
